so we did just discuss this off-camera
and while we were having the
conversation that repeatedly said wow we
should have recorded this as a video
this is a little bit less spontaneous
than my usual videos because now we're
coming on camera and sort of talking
about it again but this is the sort of
topic where I know for a fact this will
be really useful and really meaningful
to a small number of people in a
profound way I mean sometimes I do a
video and it's about a topic that's of
interest to thousands of people you know
I've had videos that reach not as an
audience of thousands but maybe it's
interesting or important to them in a
shallow way definitely what I'm talking
about here even if it only matters to 15
people it's gonna matter profoundly a
lot for years to come for those those 15
people so it's worth talking about
for that reason I'll also say I mean
this is this is one of my reasons for
being on YouTube in the first place I
have a four year old daughter I was
really concerned that my daughter would
grow up to have a romanticized view of
Buddhism because she knew her father was
a scholar of what ISM you know I mean
that can leave a kind of impression on
the kid
where they're just Pro Buddhists or on
critical of Buddhism where they assumed
that I would be uncritically Pro
meditation or you know favor certain
kinds of supernatural religious
practices would I be connected but it's
a more Buddhist ethics or something and
so I really wanted to leave enough
YouTube videos to show look kid you know
if you're seeing this ten years from now
your father did know a lot about
Buddhism but your father was a man you
already had a sophisticated philosophy
before we ever got involved with one of
them it's not like without Buddhism I'd
have no philosophy or anything in my
life you know what it wasn't I mean some
people are like that I mean you know so
if that's you know repure said if that's
your experience be honest about it some
people had no philosophy in their lives
for they got both Buddhism for me I
already was at a very advanced level in
European philosophy ancient as well as
19th century as well as modern and you
know I'd already kind of it wasn't like
there was some void in my life I was
trying to fill you know what I mean when
it when I got involved put ISM I already
approached in this self-confident in
analytical way and then I'm someone who
did I found a lot of value in Buddhist
philosophy its tradition but I was never
on critical of supernatural claims
or cognitive of claim that's really what
this year because this sometimes it's
not magic they're claiming with
meditation but it's some kind of
cognitive benefit some kind of health
benefit some kind of kind of
self-improvement all right so what what
was the question you you put to me yeah
when you first got into Buddhism did you
meditate did you try to meditate or did
you have this opinion of it right prior
to right so I mean this answer gets into
the different phases of my life in which
I was involved in Buddhism and how I
approach these issues now I express
myself on these issues it is definitely
true that in my earliest days with
Buddhism I assumed that the Nirvana
experience was an experience that people
had historically you know over 2,000
years ago and 500 years ago and still
today now I used the word experience
advisedly if you ask me is a dream real
well it's a very strange question a
dream is a real dream you know it exists
in as much as it's a dream but there's
no way you can convince me that a dream
is something more than just a dream even
if I have a dream predicting the future
and then by happenstance that event
transpires you still can't convince me
that this dream has some kind of
supernatural power to predict the future
sometimes people have a dream about a
car accident and then they have a car
accident well people have car accidents
all the time you know some people are
gonna attach other meanings onto this
and of course how many times did you
have a dream about something that didn't
happen you know this is the problem with
the way people assigned meaning
sometimes religious and philosophical
meanings and I'm so called
transcendental meaning to hallucinations
dreams just thoughts and altered states
of mind okay so it is definitely true in
the in the early days my vote with
Buddhism I wasn't just open to the
possibility this was an experience even
if you call it a hallucinatory
experience or a dreamlike experience
that people had again and again over a
period of many centuries and that
inspired people to take on a new
direction of the flies right so that's
not conceding a lot you know what I mean
like that's like saying hey look there's
a type of vision these people have had
and we can inquire into that and we
could talk to you about it what have you
and now I'd say in the latter half of my
engagement with Buddhism after I really
became an expert so I was in the
beginning we know we're all born
ignorant you know the turning point was
that no I did not even accept that I did
not even make that accept concession I
do not even think there is such an
experience or such a hallucination or
such a dream so that's the turning point
for me and in terms of people who talk
to me face-to-face
from someone else's perspective that's
quite a subtle shift you know so in the
early early days one of the one of the
first I think the first face-to-face
debate I ever had with someone about
meditation how real is meditation and
that I'm phrasing it that way
intentionally it really is just as
absurd as asking how real is a dream you
know you can experience altered states
of mind you can experience lissajous
dreams the question of real or unreal is
in many ways the wrong question to be
asking right but I had a face-to-face
debate with the guy who was a devout
Buddhist lay person had been furred was
ethnically Sinhalese he was from Sri
Lanka he wasn't a white person so he had
grown up in Buddhism and he became
totally fluent in English and he read
advanced material scholarship on what is
in emotion song she was a really
advanced layperson and he really
excitedly was presenting me with this
evidence from a scientific experiment in
which people attempted to lower the
crime rate in Washington DC by having
mass meditation having a group of people
meditate and then measuring the change
in their crime statistics and I require
I've responded very skeptically by but
you know with respect respectfully but
skeptically but walking him through step
by step kind of what was wrong
even how the research question was posed
and the study you know what I mean and
what did this mean for Buddhist
meditation anyway the Buddha didn't
promise you'd lower the crime rate
through meditation what are you really
claiming here and then above all else
what really had an impact on him was I
said why are you comparing this to doing
nothing why are you acting as if your
options are meditation or doing nothing
why don't you compare the efficacy of
this meditation to actually going out
and addressing the underlying causes of
crime such as poverty homelessness drug
addiction whatever the local problems
may be unemployment you know I mean the
reason that there's crime is due to
people being stressed out it's look
that's a quick it's completely surreal
it's you know it relies it relies on
comic book logic so I just say well use
comic logic I'm gonna flesh that a
little bit I remember I had a English
teacher
when I was in high school who said you
know if you just think logically it
makes sense that we see the way Superman
sees when you draw a comic book it looks
like there our beams coming out of his
eyes you know what his x-ray vision and
his laser vision right when you actually
think about it it's not that Superman
would shoot x-rays out of his eyes it's
that there were x-rays going in if it's
logically the exact opposite it's in a
comic book likewise it's very easy to
just draw lines coming out of someone's
brain and you know I've I mean circles
going to illustrate the concept of
psychic waves telepathy psychic waves in
a comic book it's very easy to pick that
it's very easy for a child understand
it's very easy for us to relate to as
something real right
the I think the underlying assumption is
you have a bunch of people meditating
and they make magical waves and then
that you know it really is at that at
that level and I think that's why you
can you can rationally challenge
people's irrational belief same with
what I just said about dreams and
predicting the future what interview
yeah so I mean
meditation and the scientistic claims of
a meditation I never accepted claims
about so-called mindfulness
so-called he passing a method and again
you have to remember I wasn't like a
secular outsider I wasn't like a
Christian criticizing these meditation
practices I was an Orthodox tera vaada
Buddhist criticizing this practices so
you know the Maha societal method of
meditation cannot be vindicated
scripturally or doctrinally it also
cannot be vindicated scientifically the
veep Asuna method which again began with
a certain enterprising businessman in
Myanmar has its own story but it's one
modern person created this method
meditation cannot be vindicated cannot
be validated scripturally or doctrinally
it also cannot be validated
scientifically right it has both
problems and again I use this image in
the earlier video
modern Buddhism can be as different from
ancient Buddhism as Santa Claus is
different from Jesus Christ you know
yeah we can describe these things as
meditation but this is not canonical
medication this isn't what this isn't
what the Buddha taught you know what I
mean this isn't what Buddhism was
founded on so that put me in a very
unique and powerful position as a critic
of meditation within Buddhism and I did
have the experience of seeing people for
him crying when I talked about
meditation I was talking about no
respectful way but what I was saying was
devastating to their whole worldview so
this comes to one image that I already
met you in our first conversation but I
mean it so again if you ask me do you
believe in meditation which is a it's a
totally rational way to phrase the
question but just like the question do
you believe in dreams it's almost
impossible to answer if you know what I
mean right
um one of the images I used again I've
seen people break down weeping over this
I've said to people in response to these
issues of meditation raised you know
it's quite possible for me to flex the
muscles in my arm it could be your arm
could be your leg but just to as hard as
you can
you know tighten up those muscles and
hold it you know flex it until it
reaches the point of exhaustion and then
when it is relaxed
you're gonna get a kind of tingling
you're gonna get a peculiar sensation
right and I said simply you can do the
same thing with your mind your mind is
not a muscle but you can in a sense flex
your attention span you can you know
follow there are multiple different
models they're different states of mind
and you strain to hold it to hold it
still you know it's natural for your
mind to be moving around and be you know
one if from moment to moment tense and
relaxed focus on this or focus on that
operating in this mode operating in that
mode but just like the attention
required of holding your your arm in a
certain state you can remain in a hyper
alert state focused one way or another
one type of image held in your mind what
have you there I'm not gonna give
examples here but there are many
different modes of meditation that have
been associated with Buddhism again some
orthodox some completely unorthodox and
let me tell you something you're gonna
feel tingling you're gonna feel a kind
of a heightened state or hyper exhausted
state or both you're gonna feel unusual
sensations you're gonna feel an altered
state of mind in a sense the tingling in
your arm is an altered state of your arm
what I mean you're it's it's a peculiar
mode of feeling and mode of being even
you know but it's meaningless and in the
same way that I wouldn't ascribe these
cultural values supernatural values in
religious expectations to the tingling
in my arm
I wouldn't ascribe this you know in my
mind either you've got to remain
detached again detachment is a Buddhist
you know a virtue and if that people
really break down even when the
conversation just got to that point you
know where it's like look that because
they agreed they didn't want to agree
but they knew they knew what I was
saying was true and these are people who
love snores meditating so you know now I
have also I've meditated at some of the
most August and respected people for the
spot of theories around the world and
with of some famous Buddhist monks and
so on you know I mean so I may be
another reason where that image is
compelling when I was saying it to other
people who have that external that what
I'm talking
you know that it's not so different from
tingling in your weight but in a sense
it Israel I mean this is that this is
the thing the tingling in your arm is
real it's just meaningless it's not what
you want it to be it's not anything more
than what it is at the surface of
reality to their dreams like you know
III dreamed this so like you know right
it's so important if you can't just be
I've seen people respond that way if
they have a dream about speaking to a
deceased relative so they dream about
speaking with their deceased mother or
something and then they said what can't
just be Turing was so meaningful what if
it's just a dream and you like it you
want it to be something which what if
it's a dream plus wishful thinking
cocaine - I'm sorry alcohol cocaine all
of them all of them we tell the states
of mind that be sure their people have
gotten drunk and whole bunch of other
things happen the night of change I sure
no doubt yeah it doesn't mean that God
lives in a bottle of whiskey it doesn't
mean that God is at the bottom of a you
know tab of LSD or something it doesn't
mean that God is that God or some other
religious meaning is hiding within these
things yeah that's right anyway there
are actually several steps further I can
take that discussion that starts with
the image of tingling and straining your
arms during your brain but me I don't I
don't think we have to in this video but
um you know I just mentioned that kind
of conversation with people who were
really attached to meditation has often
been devastating for them even though
you can tell what I'm saying is not
really dismissing meditation it's hourly
but you don't even have to take it that
way it's like well there were physical
exercises and there are mental exercises
that analysis of mine leaves some scope
for this to be you know something other
than you know something other than a
scam but very often in our world in the
21st century meditation yes
a scam precisely because it's being
packaged and sold as something it's not
and there's there is and it's an
overused term
cognitive dissonance is overused but a
lot of Buddhists struggle with cognitive
dissonance because whatever meditation
practice they're doing they know is not
squared with the ancient authentic form
of meditation recorded in the texts and
then what they're looking for in terms
of outcomes the religious experience
they want to have is maybe fundamentally
on Buddhists you know what I mean what
what you know some people want to have
telepathic superpowers I've read I've
read autobiographies where people
admitted that that they got involved
with meditation because they wanted to
have supernatural powers and many
traditions of Buddhism will promise you
that
you know Tibetan Buddhism and
what-have-you some you know they or they
thought it would make them smarter you
know it's very human but very pathetic
they thought well if I workout at the
gym I get stronger if I workout in
meditation I'll get smarter or gain
these cognitive abilities they may
believe that in a pseudoscience sense or
they may believe it in a more
supernatural and religious sense and but
the Buddha didn't promise you any of
this this is not this is not the the
meditation he taught this is not the
purpose of meditation as he taught it so
a lot of people are walking around with
with a kind of a kind of broken heart
about their own religion and their own
faith and they can't be honest with
themselves about how the different
pieces don't fit together that in a
sense what they're believing in is a
religion of their own invention and not
a religion that the Buddha taught you
know yeah my impression of meditation is
one of the goals at least you know you
mentioned these goals with higher
intelligence or telepathic powers one is
just mindfulness or feeling less
attached to a situation so or just being
able to see the broader picture so I
think you are in an interesting position
to give you know to discuss these
matters with people that are really into
Buddhism and meditation because you you
didn't come to these late you know I
know you're really well and I know that
you have a lot of these like qualities
that people are you're very intelligent
you you know you're able to be very
objective
and rational about things and that you
didn't come to that through meditation
right I don't know that was partly why I
was just like interested in asking this
because like I don't know it to me it's
just really impressive how you're able
to stay so right grounded well I just
think people don't see that about me on
youtube to some extent cuz on youtube I
do kind of clown around it's true and if
anything I wallow in some of my emotions
here and as a middle-aged person I have
the luxury of wallowing and emotions on
my character I don't I don't shut it out
or what-have-you but it's true I'm a
very detached person and has someone has
come up in violent in stressful
situations in real life it's it's true
and it's true that's not a product of
meditation so if as soon as we state
what the desiderata of meditation are so
meditation someone's undertaking
meditation in order to achieve these
qualities you mentioned but it could be
any list of qualities or any any list of
objectives we can then look at the
mechanics of what the meditation is and
what it's supposed to be so to give a
definite historical example meditation
as described by good at home pardon me
Buddha Gosa Buddha cosa is the
commentator on the Pali Canon he wrote
what are called the commentaries so
Buddha ghosa is not the same person as
the put up there are two different
historical figures but he has meditation
practices where you sit in a room with a
human skeleton and look at the skeleton
he has meditation practices where you
sit outdoors in the sunlight with a dish
of water and then you remove the water
and you just visualize the absent water
we sit with a dish of Earth in sunlight
and stare at the earth and then move the
he outlines these these meditation
practices why why would that help you if
you go through those prayers just
honestly ask so we can test it
scientifically why would that help you
deal with the circumstance such as a
police officer being insulting and
demeaning towards you and you said
that's a really good example because a
lot of people even if you think it's not
gonna bother you to have a police
officer in a position of authority and
sole human demean you and treat you of
it a lot of people they weren't
expecting it but it really gets to them
and they really get furious or you know
you know and there's a lot there look in
some ways it's relating to the
schoolyard bully and someone's relating
to your school teacher because this is
someone
authority and maybe you were expecting
or demanding to be you know maybe
implicitly a certain level will respect
you feel this according to you a
situation like that those are the
real-world situations where detachment
matters right how could that possibly be
related to sitting and staring at a
skeleton staring at addition water and
so on now Buddha doses meditation is not
the same as the Buddha's what the Buddha
says limited the jhanas in the actual
poly canon as i said in a recent video
that's really you know transcendental in
the sense of there's a whole East Natori
component to it of actually seeing your
past incarnations and of having these
kind of almost indescribable visions of
the sphere of formless things and what
have you you know tell me what does the
sphere of for most things look like you
know what is the what is the sphere of
neither form nor non form look like you
know there's this sequence of spheres
even the translation sphere by the way
is very peculiar if you're looking at
the original tally but anyway your mind
is elevated up above the heavens and
above the gods and indeed you're
supposed to be able to go up and talk to
the gods you're suppose to be able to
teleport yourself up to the heavens and
have conversations with Brahma and Indra
and that's Pali canons full of that it's
full of these kinds of supernatural
dialogues you can put us monks and
deities supernatural deities as well as
magical beings here on earth like yetis
and demons but anyway so that is a very
rich mythological tradition how would it
be connected to you know the real world
situation of this police officer is
being denigrating to me and you feel so
angry or you lose control if you you
know you lose your detachment or any
other example that why you know why
would one helping the other even if we
uncritically believe in what the
religious text is is telling us about
about meditation yeah so yeah maybe to
come back to my earlier point wrap it up
this video it's already past 20 minutes
but you know I said earlier briefly that
if I were to contrast sort of the first
half of my period as a poly scholar to
the second half one of the differences
was earlier on I was open to the fact I
thought I was going to get out in the
field do fieldwork do like
anthropological research I was gonna
meet Buddhist monks
who had the Nirvana experience who had
the experience of meditating and
experiencing the jhanas in the different
levels and who had maybe you know
whether he think of as a hallucination
or a dream or whatever who had seen
their prior incarnations and you know
and that this was a dream that although
my perspective only a dream a dream that
was a great historical significance
because people had it again and again
they had a 2000 years ago they had it
500 years ago and this was still
happening this was a part of the human
experience that people could still have
today and again that that's only
assuming this experience exists in the
same sense that LSD exists or that
dreams exist you know there's a
scientific sense in which dreams exist
and there's a sight there's a sense of
which dreams are nevertheless unreal and
we could say the same but these other
things and for sure there was a subtle
but profound change when I realized that
no this experience is not even something
that exists this is a myth a myth in the
truest sense of the meaning of the word
mythology and that sadly for 2,500 years
all kinds of different people whether
they hallucinate it or not whether they
meditate or not in different ways they
were groping around to reproduce this
mythological experience and they
couldn't even have it that there are no
Buddhist monks today who even have the
Nirvana experience as it's written out
the ancient texts and that I think is
the reason why in every generation there
is so much innovation there are always
new forms of meditation coming out
because people in these positions of
religious authority want to compensate
for what they're lacking they're not
having the Nirvana experience themselves
they're not able to deliver that to
their parishioners so instead they come
up with something like the mahasaya dog
you know experience my society I was a
meditation leader and he came up with
this totally original notion like having
meditators sit and drink really slowly
analyze what the drink tastes like also
eating food in slow motion and walking
in slow motion and you know supposedly
you're supposed to realize that although
the drink seems to be delicious so the
food seems to be delicious when you slow
it down and analyze it into its
components you realize this is an
illusion and it actually neither tastes
good nor bad
this is supposed to be an incident
reality okay that's a totally new
philosophy totally new meditative
practice that has nothing to do with
what the Buddha taught and is in a very
real sense unbuttoned but that was an
experience he could have and he could
teach and he could share with others and
that's what everyone's groping around
for in this religion it's exactly
because the nerve an experience is not
available is not real it's not something
that people are experiencing that
they're desperately looking for
something to substitute for it to
supplant it with and that's why
meditation means different things to
different people in different cultures
and why even now you know that there's
this constant source of innovation for
the profound experience nobody is having
I said Nirvana is a myth that is much
more meaningful than Noah's Ark it's
much more meaningful than Moses going up
to the top of the mountain and taking up
the tablets it's a myth you know that
promises you that the riddle to the
meaning of life and indeed to the
cosmology of the universe gods and men
angels and demons the living and the
dead this great cycle of reincarnation
that the riddle to all this can be
understood by you if only you can
comprehend the the nature of desire
itself and tear up desire by its roots
and then you're gonna have this world
shattering insight this transcendental
experience and that's not true and it's
never been true